MpTelemetry-1.0 standable blog post (#2975)
OpenLiberty/blogs: posts/telemetry-yasmin.adoc

---
layout: post
title: "Tracing your microservices made easy with MicroProfile Telemetry 1.0"
# Do NOT change the categories section
categories: blog
author_picture: https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/yasmin-aumeeruddy
author_github: https://github.com/yasmin-aumeeruddy

> seo-title: Logs aren't always enough: Tracing your microservices made easy with MicroProfile Telemetry 1.0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
seo-title: Logs aren't always enough- Tracing your microservices made easy with MicroProfile Telemetry 1.0
```

having a colon in the metadata value causes the post not to render properly

seo-description: Distributed tracing helps DevOps teams keep track of requests between microservices. MicroProfile adopts OpenTelemetry Tracing to allow developers to observe requests across their distributed systems.
blog_description: Distributed tracing helps DevOps teams keep track of requests between microservices. MicroProfile adopts OpenTelemetry Tracing to allow developers to observe requests across their distributed systems.
open-graph-image: https://openliberty.io/img/twitter_card.jpg
open-graph-image-alt: Open Liberty Logo
---

> = Tracing your microservices made easy with MicroProfile Telemetry 1.0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
= Microservices tracing made easy with MicroProfile Telemetry 1.0
```

Yasmin Aumeeruddy <https://github.com/yasmin-aumeeruddy>
:imagesdir: /
:url-prefix:
:url-about: /

> The use of microservice architecture may increase difficultly to see how services depend on or affect other services. Consequently, making it harder to find the source of latency or inaccuracy. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Microservice architecture can make it more difficult to see how services depend on or affect other services, which also makes it harder to find the source of latency or inaccuracy. MicroProfile Telemetry helps you collect data on the paths that application requests take through services.
```

> One way to increase observability of an application is by emitting traces. link:https://opentelemetry.io/[OpenTelemetry] is a set of APIs, SDKs, tooling and integrations that are designed for the creation and management of telemetry data such as traces, metrics, and logs. link:https://projects.eclipse.org/projects/technology.microprofile/releases/microprofile-telemetry-1.0/plan[MicroProfile Telemetry 1.0] adopts OpenTelemetry Tracing so your MicroProfile applications can benefit from both manual and automatic traces! 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One way to increase observability of an application is by emitting traces. link:https://opentelemetry.io/[OpenTelemetry] is a set of APIs, SDKs, tooling, and integrations that are designed for the creation and management of telemetry data such as traces, metrics, and logs. link:https://projects.eclipse.org/projects/technology.microprofile/releases/microprofile-telemetry-1.0/plan[MicroProfile Telemetry 1.0] adopts OpenTelemetry tracing so your MicroProfile applications benefit from both manual and automatic traces! 
```

> 

Reviewer: This list needs some kind of introductory statement, something says what it's a list of- components? Data? I'm not sure. SOmething like

"The MicroProfile Telemetry framework uses the following data to provide detailed application tracing.."

or whatever sets the proper context

> * *Traces* represent requests and consist of multiple spans.

Reviewer: for accessibility compliance, use the following definition list syntax instead of inline bold:

```suggestion
Traces:: 
Traces represent requests and consist of multiple spans.
```
 similar for the other items in this list

* *Spans* are representative of single operations in a request and contain a name, time-related data, log messages and metadata to give information about what occurs during a transaction.
* *Context* is an immutable object contained in the span data to identify the unique request that each span is a part of. This data is required for moving trace information across service boundaries, allowing developers to follow a single request through a potentially complex distributed system.
* *Exporters* are components that send data to a backend service so you can visualise and monitor the generated spans. 

> You can export the data that MicroProfile Telemetry 1.0 collects to link:https://www.jaegertracing.io/[Jaeger] or link:https://zipkin.io/[Zipkin]. Additionally, OpenTelemetry includes a simple logging exporter, which provides an easy way to check that spans are being created by viewing the data in your console. This may be helpful for debugging.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can export the data that MicroProfile Telemetry 1.0 collects to link:https://www.jaegertracing.io/[Jaeger] or link:https://zipkin.io/[Zipkin]. OpenTelemetry also provides a simple logging exporter so that you can check whether spans are created by viewing the data in your console. This exporter can be helpful for debugging.
```

> The diagram below shows a system consisting of two services which both have applications running on Open Liberty. With MicroProfile Telemetry 1.0 installed, the requests and responses generate spans and the paths between the services are monitored using their context. The spans are then exported to a dedicated backend services where they can be seen in a user interface or the console logs. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following diagram shows a system that consists of two services that both have applications running on Open Liberty. With MicroProfile Telemetry 1.0 installed, the requests and responses generate spans and the paths between the services are monitored using their context. The spans are then exported to a dedicated backend services where they can be viewed in a user interface or the console logs. 
```

image::img/blog/mptelemetry_diagram.png[Typical mpTelemetry usage architecture]

> There are multiple ways that you can collect this data: Automatic Instrumentation, Manual Instrumentation and link:https://opentelemetry.io/docs/instrumentation/java/automatic/[Open Telemetry's Java Agent].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are multiple ways that you can collect this data: automatic instrumentation, manual instrumentation, and the link:https://opentelemetry.io/docs/instrumentation/java/automatic/[Open Telemetry Java Agent].
```

> We'll be using a simple demo application to show you how to collect traces from multiple services. Check out the code here: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this post, we'll use a simple demo application to show you how to collect traces from multiple services. Check out the code in the following repository: 
```

link:https://github.com/yasmin-aumeeruddy/mpTelemetry-Demo[https://github.com/yasmin-aumeeruddy/mpTelemetry-Demo]

> Before we get started, it would be a good idea to get the backend set up. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before we get started, let's get the backend set up. 
```

> If you would like to use Jaeger, follow the instructions link:https://www.jaegertracing.io/docs/1.39/getting-started/[here]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use Jaeger, follow the  link:https://www.jaegertracing.io/docs/1.39/getting-started/[Jaeger Getting Started instructions]. 
```

> If you would rather use Zipkin, you can follow the steps link:https://zipkin.io/pages/quickstart[here].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you would rather use Zipkin, you can follow the steps link:https://zipkin.io/pages/quickstart[the Zipkin Quickstart].
```

> ## Automatic Instrumentation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Automatic instrumentation
```

MicroProfile Telemetry 1.0 allows you to observe traces without modifying source code in your Jakarta RESTful web service (aka JAX-RS) applications. 

> As you can see in the `system` service, you can enable `mpTelemetry-1.0` in your link:https://github.com/yasmin-aumeeruddy/mpTelemetry-Demo/blob/main/system/src/main/liberty/config/server.xml#L5[server.xml]: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As you can see in the `system` service in the demo application, you can enable `mpTelemetry-1.0` in your link:https://github.com/yasmin-aumeeruddy/mpTelemetry-Demo/blob/main/system/src/main/liberty/config/server.xml#L5[server.xml]: 
```

[source, xml]
----
<featureManager>
  <feature>mpTelemetry-1.0</feature>
</featureManager>
----

> By default, MicroProfile Telemetry tracing is off. To enable any tracing aspects, specify `otel.sdk.disabled=false` as a config property or `OTEL_SDK_DISABLED=false` as an environment property for your server. This is enabled in the demo link:https://github.com/yasmin-aumeeruddy/mpTelemetry-Demo/blob/main/inventoy/src/main/resources/META-INF/microprofile-config.properties#L2[here].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, MicroProfile Telemetry tracing is off. To enable any tracing aspects, specify `otel.sdk.disabled=false` as a config property or `OTEL_SDK_DISABLED=false` as an environment property for your server. This property is enabled in the demo link:https://github.com/yasmin-aumeeruddy/mpTelemetry-Demo/blob/main/inventoy/src/main/resources/META-INF/microprofile-config.properties#L2[microprofile-config.properties]  file.
```

For more information on these properties, see link:https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/sdk-environment-variables.md[OpenTelemetry's configuration documentation].

Open a new command-line session and navigate to the `system` directory:

`cd system`

Start the `system` service: 

`mvn liberty:run`

Navigate to the system properties endpoint: 

`http://localhost:9080/system/properties`

A span for this request will be automatically created by MicroProfile Telemetry. Check for the span in the exporter's endpoint. For example: 

image::img/blog/mptelemetry_system_span.png[System span]

> You have collected traces using Automatic Instrumentation! However, you might want to annotate selected methods or collect custom telemetry data. It's now time to modify source code to add more data to your spans...  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You just collected traces using Automatic Instrumentation! However, you might want to annotate selected methods or collect custom telemetry data. It's now time to modify source code to add more data to your spans. 
```

> ## Manual Instrumentation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Manual instrumentation
```

[source, xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>io.opentelemetry</groupId>
    <artifactId>opentelemetry-api</artifactId>
    <version>1.19.0</version>
</dependency>
<dependency>
    <groupId>io.opentelemetry.instrumentation</groupId>
    <artifactId>opentelemetry-instrumentation-annotions</artifactId>
    <version>1.19.0-alpha</version>
</dependency>
----

### Code Instrumentation

Now you are all set to instrument your code to manually create traces. We start by link:https://github.com/yasmin-aumeeruddy/mpTelemetry-Demo/blob/main/inventory/src/main/java/io/openliberty/demo/inventory/InventoryResource.java#L38-L42[`injecting a Tracer and Span`] object: 

[source, java]
----
@Inject
Tracer tracer;

@Inject
Span getPropertiesSpan;
----

This can then be used to create spans. For example, a span called `GettingProperties` starts and an event is added before the `system` service is called: 

[source,java]
----
getPropertiesSpan = tracer.spanBuilder("GettingProperties").startSpan();
Properties props = manager.get(hostname);
try(Scope scope = getPropertiesSpan.makeCurrent()){
    ...
    getPropertiesSpan.addEvent("Received properties");
}
finally{
    getPropertiesSpan.end();
}
----

> You can also create new spans by annotating methods in any Jakarta CDI beans using link:https://opentelemetry.io/docs/instrumentation/java/automatic/annotations/[`@WithSpan`]. link:https://github.com/yasmin-aumeeruddy/mpTelemetry-Demo/blob/main/inventory/src/main/java/io/openliberty/demo/inventory/InventoryManager.java#L47-L48[Here] a span is created when a new system is added to the inventory. The `hostname` method parameter is annotated with the `@SpanAttribute` annotation to indicate that it is part of the trace: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also create new spans by annotating methods in any Jakarta CDI beans using link:https://opentelemetry.io/docs/instrumentation/java/automatic/annotations/[`@WithSpan`]. The link:https://github.com/yasmin-aumeeruddy/mpTelemetry-Demo/blob/main/inventory/src/main/java/io/openliberty/demo/inventory/InventoryManager.java#L47-L48[InventoryManager.java] file in the demo application creates a span when a new system is added to the inventory. The `hostname` method parameter is annotated with the `@SpanAttribute` annotation to indicate that it is part of the trace: 
```

[source, java]
----
@WithSpan
public void add(@SpanAttribute(value = "hostname") String hostname, Properties systemProps) {
    ...
}
----

> A span created using the `@WithSpan` annotation can be given a name. For example, the span created link: https://github.com/yasmin-aumeeruddy/mpTelemetry-Demo/blob/main/inventory/src/main/java/io/openliberty/demo/inventory/InventoryManager.java#L58[here] is given the name "list":

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A span created using the `@WithSpan` annotation can be given a name. For example, link:https://github.com/yasmin-aumeeruddy/mpTelemetry-Demo/blob/main/inventory/src/main/java/io/openliberty/demo/inventory/InventoryManager.java#L58[this span] is given the name "list":
```

[source,java]
----
@WithSpan("list")
public InventoryList list() {
    ...
}
----

> Now that spans have been created manually, we can build the inventory service and deploy it to Open Liberty:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that you created the spans manually, we can build the inventory service and deploy it to Open Liberty:
```

`cd inventory`

`mvn liberty:run`

Navigate to the inventory endpoint:

`http://localhost:9081/inventory/systems/localhost`

> You should see five spans in the exporter's endpoint: four spans from inventory and one span from system. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should see five spans in the exporter's endpoint: four spans from inventory and one span from system, as shown in the following example:
```

image::img/blog/mptelemetry_inventory_manual_span.png[Inventory manual span]

> These spans are all part of one single trace which is emitted from the request to the endpoint above. It is therefore easier to identify the source of inaccuracy or latency in a single request by debugging spans individually.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These spans are all part of one single trace that is emitted from the request to the endpoint. It is therefore easier to identify the source of inaccuracy or latency in a single request by debugging spans individually.  
```

> See link:https://opentelemetry.io/docs/instrumentation/java/manual/[OpenTelemetry's manual instrumentation documentation].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information, see link:https://opentelemetry.io/docs/instrumentation/java/manual/[OpenTelemetry's manual instrumentation documentation].
```

## Java Agent

> 

Reviewer: what are the advantages of using the agent? Why might someone want do it? The reason for manual instrumentation is clear, but not so much why you'd want to use the agent.

Reviewer 2: I have updated the java agent introduction

You can attach the JAR by adding the following to your `pom.xml`:

[source, xml]
----
<!-- Plugin to package opentelemetry java agent -->
<plugin>
    <groupId>org.apache.maven.plugins</groupId>
    <artifactId>maven-dependency-plugin</artifactId>
    <version>3.3.0</version>
    <executions>
        <execution>
            <id>copy</id>
            <phase>package</phase>
            <goals>
                <goal>copy</goal>
            </goals>
        </execution>
    </executions>
    <configuration>
        <artifactItems>
            <artifactItem>
                <groupId>io.opentelemetry.javaagent</groupId>
                <artifactId>opentelemetry-javaagent</artifactId>
                <version>1.19.0</version>
                <type>jar</type>
                <outputDirectory>src/main/liberty/config</outputDirectory>
                <destFileName>opentelemetry-javaagent.jar</destFileName>
            </artifactItem>
        </artifactItems>
    </configuration>
</plugin>
----

> You can then run Maven with the `package` goal. This will copy the OpenTelemetry Java Agent in to your server config: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can then run Maven with the `package` goal, which copies the OpenTelemetry Java Agent into your server config: 
```

`mvn package` 

> add the following line to your `jvm.options` file along with the link:https://opentelemetry.io/docs/instrumentation/java/automatic/agent-config/[agent configuration]:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add the following line to your `jvm.options` file along with the link:https://opentelemetry.io/docs/instrumentation/java/automatic/agent-config/[agent configuration]:
```

This is a little confusing as written- do you also configure the agent in the jvm.options file? Or is config a spearate step/process

```
-javaagent:opentelemetry-javaagent.jar
```

> There are some limitations of using the agent to trace services:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following limitations apply to using the agent to trace services:
```

### Configuration

* Configuration is shared between all applications deployed to the server. 
* Configuration properties are not read using MicroProfile Config and instead are only read from system properties and environment variables. 
* The agent reads its configuration very early in the startup process so system properties are not read from `bootstrap.properties`. 

### SPI extensions
* link:https://www.javadoc.io/doc/io.opentelemetry/opentelemetry-sdk-extension-autoconfigure-spi/1.19.0/index.html[SPI-Extensions] within applications will be ignored. See the link:https://opentelemetry.io/docs/instrumentation/java/automatic/agent-config/#extensions[agent documentation] for providing SPI extensions.

### Annotations
* The agent instruments rest calls and methods annotated with `@WithSpan`. Therefore, the created spans may be slightly different to those you would see with MicroProfile Telemetry's manual instrumentation.

### Library Instrumentation

> * Open Liberty uses many open source libraries internally. Some of these may be instrumented automatically by the agent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Open Liberty uses many open source libraries internally. Some of these might be instrumented automatically by the agent.
```

open-graph-image: https://openliberty.io/img/twitter_card.jpg
open-graph-image-alt: Open Liberty Logo
---
= Microservices tracing made easy with MicroProfile Telemetry 1.0

Yasmin Aumeeruddy <https://github.com/yasmin-aumeeruddy>
:imagesdir: /
:url-prefix:
:url-about: /

Microservice architecture can make it more difficult to see how services depend on or affect other services, which also makes it harder to find the source of latency or inaccuracy. MicroProfile Telemetry helps you collect data on the paths that application requests take through services.

One way to increase observability of an application is by emitting traces. link:https://opentelemetry.io/[OpenTelemetry] is a set of APIs, SDKs, tooling, and integrations that are designed for the creation and management of telemetry data such as traces, metrics, and logs. link:https://projects.eclipse.org/projects/technology.microprofile/releases/microprofile-telemetry-1.0/plan[MicroProfile Telemetry 1.0] adopts OpenTelemetry tracing so your MicroProfile applications benefit from both manual and automatic traces!

> It would help to become familiar with the key concepts involved in distributed tracing: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's start with the key concepts involved in distributed tracing: 
```

There are multiple ways that you can collect this data: automatic instrumentation, manual instrumentation, and the link:https://opentelemetry.io/docs/instrumentation/java/automatic/[Open Telemetry Java Agent].

> MicroProfile Telemetry 1.0 is currently released as beta content. You can download the lastest version of the Open Liberty beta link:https://openliberty.io/start/#runtime_betas[here]. In this post, we'll use a simple demo application to show you how to collect traces from multiple services. Check out the code in the following repository: 

Reviewer 2: @dmuelle  I have mentioned that it is in beta here

Reviewer: sorry, missed that
